Humans have a tendency to become what they attack

People are funny creatures. They seem to have an inherent tendency to oppose any hegemony or authority in favor of change. Sometimes they may be pleased  and satisfied with the ruling party but as long as humans have existed in societies, there have always ben a fraction, sometimes more, people who have wanted to overthrow the residing governance. This is simply because of the fact that no perfect system or set of rules exists which can be applied to all. So, throughout history people have experienced long lasting and potent regimes like those of the Mongols,Romans,Mauryas and most notably The British Empire, where once the sun never sat. On the other hand people have also constantly tried to topple their rulers and governance primarily in order to get rid of what they have perceived as tyranny as can be seen in the from of The French, The Russian and The American revolutions. Quite interestingly there is another seemingly inveterate tendency in humans: the tendency to become what they attack.

There have been many instances in human history in which the perpetrators of a coup have gone on to repeat the same atrocities practiced by those whom they supplanted. Take for example The French Revolution, the first one, in 1789-1799 against the apathetic reign of King Louis the XVI. People claimed that the indifferent attitude the nobles and monarchs had led to countless deaths and constant deterioration of the french society at the time. Yet, the revolutionaries left no stone unturned when it came to wrecking havoc and brutal killing and torture of nobles by the thousands. Despite the revolution and the best efforts of Robespierre, the main protaganist of the revolt, it took France fifty odd years and two more similar revolutions to stabilise and during this time, the revolutionaries fared no better than the heartless monarchy which they had sought to destroy. However we need not go as far as revolutionary france to see the most conspicous example of this paradox. Before our independence in 1947, us Indians had seen the British pillage the resources of our great nation for over 200 years. The British openly stole our forests, minerlas, foodgrains and national treasures. Their agricultural policies intended for producing large quantities of indigo,opium and 'exotic' spices forced the Indian populace to face over a hundred and fifty years of famine and draught year after year, resulting in innumberable deaths. Not to mention that they knowingly distorted our education,governing and judicial systems so that the people will always be fragmented and veiw the British with reverance. Today, after more than half a century of independence when we see our politicians,judciary and educators involved in countless scandals, stuffing the Swiss bank with our country's money and hollowing India by smuggling her natural resources to other countries, which by the way has directly led to the Naxalite Insurgency, one is forced to wonder what use have been the sacrifices of Rani Laxmibai, Bhagat Singh and Mahatma Gandhi. The British are long gone, but their think tank is ubiquitous in the rule of any governing regime. The various political parties are constantly fighting with and blaming each other on the issues of morality, public welfare and what not but once they come to power, they pick up essentially where the British had left.

Now lets go a bit away from the political scene. Being a football(soccer) fanatic, I can cite one example of the tendency of humans to become what they attack, even in football. Fans of a generation or two ealier must have heard of a certain  Englishman named Don Revie; the man who created the dirtiest team in football. Don Revie was the manager of the famous yorkshire club Leeds United in the early 1970's. He won eight trophies with the English giants, primarily with the new footballing philosophy he had instilled in his players. Leeds' players focussed on a pressing game which gave their opponents little time on the ball. Revie's lads kicked,pushed,intimidated and cheated their way to glory year after year. The other teams did not know how to handle these new tactics by which the Leeds players were able to play on the fine line which divides competetiveness and cheating. So, to counter this, other English teams also started experimenting with these tactics and started training and nurturing players who could play the game in this style. Today, English football has 'evolved' into the stereotype of overly physical and rough football; exactly what Don Revie was heavily criticised for, by professionals and media alike, in his era. 

So, yes it is apparent that humans have a tendency to become what they attack. What is not so apparent is why. What makes people change, sometimes suddenly and at other times gradually, and morph into the very ideologies and beliefs that they had initially opposed? probably the answer to corrupt politicos can be found in the paradigm: 'Absolute power corrupts absolutely', but what about others? I am sure we can find the instances of this paradox in our everyday lives as well. Perhaps the characteristics which the people seek to destroy are the very ones which attract them to take some action in the first place. Perhaps subconciously, people want to be the monarchs and tyrants instead of seeing somepody else on the throne. While we may figure out the reason for this perplexity, one thing is certain. To sustain any revolutionary change in the hegemony,culture or leadership of a people, there exists a need for the protagonists to inpire a sense of self respect and dignity among the masses and to instill in their hearts and minds the will and tenacity to consistently keep working towards preserving and respecting what they have acheived through so much hardship. The most prominent example where such a change has actually pccured is the USA after the American Revolution. More than two hundred years and they are still going strong. 


